well the conflict in the Middle East
isn't just causing Global concern in the
political and diplomatic Arena there's
also increasing apprehension about the
effect it could have on the global
economy if history is any guide the
conflict has the potential to send
Financial shock waves far beyond the
Middle
East empty highways stretching for miles
across Germany and other Western
European countries that was in 1973
during the oil crisis
during the yam kapor war between Israel
on one side and Egypt and Syria on the
other Arab states had stopped supplying
the West with crude oil after the Hamas
terror attack on Israel and the Israeli
retaliatory strikes in the Gaza Strip
many wonder will the world once again
face a scenario of oil scarcity the
price of oil Rose after the Hamas attack
however it has since normalized and
unlike 50 years ago experts today do not
see a united front of the Arab oil
producing countries against the West
cartel today we do not have a cartel
instead we have highly diverging
interests even within the camp of the
Gulf States especially between Saudi
Arabia and Iran and this conflict did
not exist in the past that is to say we
are not currently expecting a situation
like we had in
1973 another reason a more globally
interconnected economy Arab state are
shareholders with considerable interest
in corporations in Europe and the us
including in non- oil related firms like
Volkswagen Daimler or Seamans however an
escalation of the conflict could
fundamentally change the situation for
example in the straight of horutz this
narrow straight just over 30 mies wide
is controlled by Iran considered to be
the main supporter of Hamas and
Hezbollah 20% of the entire Global oil
production must pass through here in the
past Iran has repeatedly threatened to
block the straight and has impeded the
passage of tankers from Western
countries a military escalation could
trigger Iran to step in again and cause
the global economy to
collapse the risk of a recession in the
Euro Zone cannot be ruled out due to an
escalating conflict not at all simply
because the Euro Zone with its high
energy demand is primarily dependent on
the Gulf States in the Middle East as a
whole cuz I'm
tanked countries with energy intensive
and processing Industries like Germany
would be particularly
affected right let's discuss this
further with Rob wats from DW business
good to see you mate um why is it so
important to the global economy that
this Israel Hamas War doesn't escalate
further because it's as simple as the
further the conflict spreads the bigger
the impact for the global economy and we
know what that impact can be because we
can look at past conflicts but but also
because economists have been working
their way through all of these various
scenarios and looking at the potential
impact that it could have and what
they're treating as I suppose the worst
realistic scenario is that we not only
have it spreading beyond the existing
territory of Israel and Gaza but into
the wider region and then ultimately a
direct war between Israel and Iran and
that puts various factors into play but
most crucially oil and global shpping
Iran has control of the straight of
formus through which a fifth of global
oil and all manner of other non-oil
products passes but also Iranian oil is
one of the few things that's keeping oil
prices at a reasonable level at the
moment so disruption to that would be a
big problem and actually economists at
Bloomberg have been crunching the
numbers on this they believe that in the
worst case scenario a trillion dollars
could be wiped off the global economy in
one year if that were to happen we could
see oil at $150 a barrel at the moment
it's around $90 a barrel it's never been
that high so you paint a a picture of a
pretty big problem but it's not the only
problem because many parts of the world
are still dealing with the Fallout from
the Ukraine war and the pandemic does
this war in the Middle East now affect
those economic recoveries that are just
underway again it all depends on the
degree of escalation but we know that
those recoveries are very fragile here
in the Euro zone for example and in the
United States they're walking a tight
rope between getting inflation down and
not sending their own economies into a
recession and it would only really take
a Tremor to knock them off that tight
rope and something like oil prices
surging and global Shipping being
disrupted are exactly the sort of tremor
that could do that because both of those
things are inflationary it becomes more
expensive to produce things but it also
becomes more expensive to send those
things around the world and then even if
you look at you know much po poorer
countries emerging economies are much
more vulnerable to fluctuations in
Energy prices so really it's the last
thing that recovering economies need
right now in political terms we're
seeing countries having to pick sides in
the conflict I guess economically as
well what does that mean in how these
countries will then trade with each
other this is quite a familiar story
from the past couple of years isn't it
and we've seen how this Dynamic plays
out as countries have been falling in
behind Ukraine and behind Russia they've
become reluctant to trade with other
nations with whom they have ideological
differences this brings in one of the
big buzzwords of the global economy at
the moment de globalization for a long
time the ethos was trade with whoever
you want get yourself the best deal it
doesn't matter if you're buying stuff
from you know an oppressive regime on
the other side of the world but that's
really flipped on its head in the last
couple of years most noticeably with the
US trading less with China and doing
more trade with Canada and Mexico you
know its neighbors and people that it's
got better relations with you can expect
what's happening in the Middle East to
accelerate that splintering as countries
just try to avoid doing trade with other
nations who they fear might use that
trade as its own kind of weapon it's a
complicated story Robert thanks for
clearing it up for us Roberts from DW
business